coming up next a retrospective of the
presidency of Richard Nixon is the
conference theme of a program sponsored
by Hofstra University the panel focuses
on secrecy the government and the media
a good afternoon as we get to the end of
this extravaganza it's my pleasure to
introduce the moderator of the last
panel Victor Navasky old friend former
client and he's a graduate of swathmore
and as you know he's the editor of the
nation
and has been a leading observer of the
events that we're talking about and a
journalist of folks have won prizes a
number of writing prizes including
naming names and Kennedy Justice and
it's a great pleasure to introduce
Victor Navasky as the moderator of the
last panel of the next last man
[Applause]
thank you
I've been instructed to mention that
within minutes of this session you may
obtain copies of tapes that are that
will reflect what happened here except
for 18 minutes the Jim the gentleman Oh
princess now I want to compliment the
organizers of this conference on
selecting as impartial moderator the
editor of a left-wing radical rag and to
put on the panel as a presumably
embattled participant among others a
Network News anchorman and the former
editor of one of our most distinguished
newspapers these guys always claim that
they're impartial but in fact at another
time and on another panel on another
occasion I would argue that they have
what is what I would call the ideologies
of the center and the problem with the
spokesman for the Nixon White House and
white clay might say is impartial
moderator who we're delighted to have
here is that they miss perceived and
misrepresented the mainstream press as
some sort of liberal conspiracy when in
fact all they were were ideological
centrists so those of you who are at the
last panel would heard the complaint
that it was stacked because it had you
know too many people from one side and
only one representative of the Nixon
point of view I see this as stacked the
other way that you have two alumni of
the administration you have two
representatives of the ideology of the
center you have two academics who are
also present themselves as impartial and
and then as a moderator I don't get a
to tell you what's really going on so
but forgive these in moderate remarks
from your moderator now I can think of
no panel at this remarkable and
wide-ranging conference with more
contemporary resonance than a panel on
the subject of secrecy the government
and the media how much if any of the
secrecy lies and illegal actions
revealed in the recently released
iran-contra gate report are a legacy of
our failure to address properly the pre
Reagan systemic breakdown associated
with Watergate and Vietnam as an assault
on constitutionalism how much of what
was stamped secret in the Nixon years I
could add by the way the Kennedy years
in the Johnson years but we'd happen to
be talking about the Nixon years how
much of what was stamped secret in the
Nixon years could safely be made public
have we really accepted the idea that
the lies the that that have we accepted
the idea that the less the public knows
the greater our national security we
hear much about the harm to our national
security if certain information gets out
forget that our adversaries the USSR
like the National Security Agency
listens in on everything we say anyway
but what about the disasters that occur
as the result of information kept from
the public what is the relationship
between Richard Nixon's comments to
David Frost but the President does it
it's not illegal and foreign halls
reference to a higher law is it in
retrospect desirable necessary for
government officials to make statements
which quickly become you should forgive
the expression no longer operative now
the papers this morning that we're about
to hear are sharply focused on the
legacy of the Pentagon Papers and on
President Nixon's conception of
executive privilege
these are important starting points for
serious probing of the larger issues
posed for this panel and I hope and
expect that our commentators and you
people out there in the question period
will explore not merely the issues
raised by the papers but the
implications of these papers the let me
tell you right now who the participants
of the panel are in relatively short
form they have very long and
distinguished resumes all of them so
that we can get on with the business of
the afternoon
I have cruelly requested of our
panelists that they try to restrict
their summaries of their learning papers
to ten minutes each
we then will move from the papers to the
commentators and then we'll see what
happens
our first paper is going to be on
secrecy and democracy the unresolved
legacy of the Pentagon Papers and the
author of this paper is John Kincaid who
is the director of research of the
Advisory Commission on integrate
intergovernmental relations in
Washington DC
mr. Kincaid is got his PhD from Temple
University he has an MA in urban affairs
from the University of Wisconsin he did
additional study at the University of
Michigan in Ann Arbor and he has a list
of publications that is more than I
could carry up to the platform but is
very impressive the second paper of the
panel is called President Nixon's
conception of executive privilege
defining the scope and limits of
governmental secrecy Mark J Roselle who
will deliver it is a member of the
department of political science at Mary
Washington College he got his PhD from
the University of Virginia he got his MA
his MA from the University of Virginia
in public administration he too has won
many academic awards both at the
University of Virginia and at Eisenhower
College had a distinguished academic
career and I won't go down his list of
publications our commentators need
little introduction for me they they are
for the most part I suspect known to you
first we're going to hear from Gerald
Warren who is presently the editor of
the San Diego Union he was graduated
from the University of Nebraska in 1952
with a Bachelor of Arts degree and a
major in journalism from January 1969 to
August 1975 who is deputy press
secretary to the president in the Nixon
and Ford administration's he became
editor of the
San Diego Union in September of 1975 our
second commentator will be Tom Brokaw
Tom Brokaw as you know is the anchor of
NBC Nightly News and he during the
period of 73 to 76
he was NBC News as White House
correspondent and during that period he
covered all important Watergate
developments he's only three years
overdue and an article he is promised in
the Nation magazine
Ron Ziegler is presently president of
the National Association of truck stop
operators in November 1980 he assumed
that position he served as chief chief
spokesman for President Nixon and the
White House staff from 1969 to 1974 and
directed and administered a staff
responsible for press corps logistics
and communications policy he's he was a
familiar figure on television during all
of those years
Howard Simons was managing editor of the
Washington Post for 13 years he was
managing editor during the Watergate
period he became curator of the Nieman
Foundation for journalists at Harvard in
1984 and as was pointed out to me
earlier with with he is the only man in
the room who knows the identity of deep
throat with that why don't we start
unless deep throat is also a tempter I
thought you were deep throat you thought
what you thought I was deep throat well
if the organizers of this conference
knew what they were doing they would
have announced that they would reveal
deep throat at the banquet and had three
people come up with a bag on each head
and then you know well the real deep
throat please stand up anyway so our
first paper let's get on with the show
[Applause]
Thank You Victor the issues that I want
to address in the paper this afternoon
are some of the unresolved legal issues
in terms of governmental secrecy arising
out of the case involving the release of
the Pentagon Papers in 1971 as you're
well aware the Pentagon Papers had a
significant event effect on events of
that time and I think historically
played an important role in the course
of the American involvement in Vietnam
and also played an important role in
ultimately in the downfall of the Nixon
administration in 19 1974 in addition I
think it's fair to say that the the
Pentagon Papers had a long-run effect on
how we conduct foreign policy in the
United States in 1971 there were members
of Congress who refused to look at the
documents now known as the Pentagon
Papers because they were classified
top-secret and they didn't believe that
they had the authority to look at those
documents today such an attitude on the
part of members of Congress would be
inconceivable so that the release of the
Pentagon Papers in 1971 constituted a
kind of watershed in American history
and in and of themselves played I think
an important role in subsequent
developments nevertheless the trial of
Daniel Ellsberg and Anthony Russo
associated with the Pentagon Papers
raised the number of difficult issues
for secrecy and public knowledge in a
democratic society and represented a
novel attempt on the part of the Nixon
administration to provide a judicial
basis for prosecuting people for
releasing information to the American
public just by way of brief background
as you know the Pentagon Papers were
published in the New York Times in June
of 1971 the Attorney General secured an
injunction against the New York Times to
stop them from publishing the papers
then the Washington Post began to
publish the papers an injunction was
gotten to
them and then other papers began
publishing them and the Justice
Department was chasing around the
country trying to get injunctions
against newspapers for publishing these
these documents ultimately in a very
hurried decision the Supreme Court ruled
in favor of the newspapers it overturned
those injunctions allowing the
publication to proceed
however there were sharp dissents in
that Supreme Court decision and in
addition the court generally held that
under certain circumstances the Supreme
Court might uphold the idea of
preventing newspapers in advance from
publishing information in their
possession so that those injunctions in
1971 were the first time in American
history that the United States
government had exercised prior restraint
on newspapers and events that
outstripped even the Sedition Act of
1798 now what were the issues in the
subsequent trial very soon after the
release of the papers Daniel Ellsberg
was indicted for photocopying the papers
feeling that they might have to build a
better case and being uncertain of the
grounds of prosecution the government
continued to investigate the situation
both legally and illegally it was two
months after the initial indictment that
the plumbers Union unit broke into the
office of Ellsberg psychiatrist to
obtain additional material presumably to
discredit him and his motives with
regard to the pentagon papers at the
same time the FBI was also trying to
question Anthony Russo with regard to
the Pentagon Papers he refused to
respond to FBI questions
he ended up being thrown in jail for
more than a month for contempt of court
and finally at the end of 1971 a new
indictment was issued by the Justice
Department charging both Ellsberg and
Russo with
counts of conspiracy espionage and theft
with regard to photocopying the
documents which are now known as the as
the pentagon papers this prosecution I
think we have to say was a political
prosecution in the classical sense there
is no statutory basis for executive
classification of information as they
pertain to the pentagon papers official
secrecy in the United States is limited
to atomic energy secrets and information
having to do with military codes neither
of which were involved in the Pentagon
Papers case another interesting point
something that is often overlooked is
that Ellsberg and Russo were not
prosecuted for releasing the Pentagon
Papers to the newspapers they were
prosecuted simply for photocopying the
documents and the period covered by the
indictment ended nine months before the
papers appeared in the newspapers it
would appear that the administration was
very concerned about avoiding a direct
collision with the press the New York
Times and The Washington Post and so
nothing in the prosecution of Ellsberg
and Russo had to do with the actual
release to the public of the other
Pentagon Papers now what were the issues
in this trial and why are they so
troubling the indictment broke down into
three broad categories of charges one
the first was conspiracy to defraud the
United States and an agency thereof and
I'm quoting from the indictment by
impairing obstructing and defeating its
lawful governmental function of
controlling the dissemination of
classified government studies reports
memoranda and communications
the key issue in this charge revolves
around the question of lawful what is
the lawful governmental function and
what does that mean in terms of criminal
prosecution the classification of
government documents such as the
pentagon papers are based upon executive
order in a Democratic Society one can
presumably not be criminally prosecuted
for violating an executive order
ordinarily with regard to classified
documents if you are a government
employee and you release the documents
you can be administratively reprimanded
because there is no criminal statute if
you are not a government employee then
there isn't much the government can do
about it and there is no basis for a
criminal prosecution what the Justice
Department did in this case was to
construct a novel interpretation of law
and to argue in the trial that an
executive order and I quote has the
force of law whether promulgated under a
direct statute or under the authority of
the executive which is not by statute
which comes from its constitutional
power there is no distinction between
those two in other words on the basis of
the executive order alone with no
statute standing behind it the
government maintained that it could send
a person to prison for 50 years and
fined them for one hundred and twenty
thousand dollars which was the penalties
that would have been levied against
Daniel Ellsberg this caused the judge in
the trial a considerable amount of
consternation and further arguments
would have asked from the government to
justify the basis of this charge and
subsequently what the government
maintained in the trial is that
admitting that there is no criminal
statute standing behind the executive
order the government argued that the
Freedom of Information Act in a sense
implicitly justified prosecution for
violation of the executive order and
that is that the government maintained
that the Freedom of Information Act by
enacting that wall the
ingress implicitly provided a statutory
foundation for the executive
classification system and thereby
implicitly recognized the authority of
the executive branch to defend that
system so we had a very novel use of a
conspiracy statute applied to an
executive order the implication of which
is that had the defendants been in fact
convicted and that had been upheld in
essence they would have been convicted
under an executive decree system in
which the president could create
executive orders which have no statutory
foundation and people could be
prosecuted for violating them ironically
no one had ever been prosecuted and I
don't believe since then has ever been
prosecuted for violating other aspects
of a classification executive orders
namely those executive orders require
the documents be declassified at certain
points in time and no one has been
prosecuted for a failure to declassify a
document the second set of charges in
the trial dealt with espionage now this
was a rather curious charge as well
since the actions alleged in the
indictment involved only the
photocopying of documents the government
never accused Ellsberg and Russo of
giving these documents to any foreign
agents or foreign power the implication
of this prosecution as Tony Russo
pointed out was that the Nixon
administration seemed to be assuming
that the American people were the enemy
in charging espionage under this
circumstances what the government
claimed basically is whenever any
American citizen finds a document which
is stamped top secret and doesn't turn
it over to the government he or she is
guilty of espionage so beware of that if
you ever see such a document lying on
the street or something like like that
furthermore according to the 80 year
history of the Espionage Act to prove
espionage you have to prove that the
defendants had an intent to aid a
foreign nation or injure the United
States in this case the government
alleged that there was no need
to prove intent that the mere release of
the information would have injured the
United States so as a result the
testimony in the trial had a very weird
attitude about it and that is to say
that the government had to prove that if
the papers had been released at the time
they were photocopied they would have
injured the United States or aided a
foreign nation an entirely hypothetical
situation the third set of charges dealt
with theft and the first issue here
concerned the question of what was
stolen initially the government claimed
that that the physical documents were
stolen but when the defense presented
information showing that the documents
were the personal copies of three former
Defense Department officials and that
they had approved Ellsberg's removing
these documents from the rand
corporations library the government
backed off from the notion that what was
stolen were physical documents and then
proceeded to argue that what Ellsberg
and Russo had stolen by way of the
Pentagon Papers was the arrangement of
the words on the pages and the ideas
conveyed by that arrangement this is a
crucial issue because in a democratic
society information presumably belongs
to the people if you look at government
documents they are not copyrighted
they're not copyrighted because the
government in a democratic society does
not have a proprietary interest in
information and what in a sense the
government was charging then was that
Ellsberg and Russo were stealing
information had this been upheld it
would have also implied that since
Ellsberg had shared these documents with
members of Congress that if he was
guilty of theft then members of Congress
would have also in effect been guilty of
theft for looking at these documents the
presumption being that the information
belong to the executive branch and was
stolen from the executive branch and
that even another branch of government
could not see them so in the conspiracy
charge then we had a situation where in
a sense the executive branch was a
asserting an executive decree authority
in the espionage charged the government
in a sense implicitly assuming that the
American people are the enemy and in the
theft charge the government was
maintaining that it had a proprietary
infor interest in information this trial
was an attempt by the executive branch
to get the judicial branch to do what
the legislative branch has refused to do
since 1917 and that is to enact an
official secrets act in the United
States or to revise the Espionage Act in
such a way as to cover classified
information as released to the American
people if you look at the criminal code
revision recommendations of the Nixon
administration all of the points that
were raised in the Pentagon Papers trial
are covered in the proposals that the
administration had made for criminal
code revisions and if those proposals
had been accepted by the Congress and
fortunately in my view they were not we
would have had the functional equivalent
of an executive Secrets Act in the
United States and one of the things that
the administration wanted in criminal
code revision and which had also
maintained in the trial is that the fact
that a document might have been
incorrectly classified top-secret would
be no defense in a case so the
theoretically a document on which
somebody accidentally dropped the
top-secret rubber stamp and you picked
it up and somehow were charged with
espionage that would be no defense in
that kind of situation where are we
today as a result of the Pentagon Papers
none of these issues are resolved
legally in the United States the trial
was dismissed for gross governmental
misconduct in some respects we were
worse off we now have arrangements with
the CIA to censor books published by CIA
agents we have executive agreements
regarding secrecy and
we still have a highly politicized
situation with regard to executive
secrecy in my view there it probably is
no legislative or judicial way in which
we could finally resolve these issues
they rely a great deal I think on the
honor of the people who are serving in
government and throwing a number of
presidential administrations that honor
has been called into question so we
still find ourselves in a very ambiguous
situation with regard to the right of
the government for the privilege of the
government to keep some information of
secret and the right of the people in a
democratic society to be free to know
that information thank you
Margaux is out
I'm gonna be speaking about President
Nixon's conception of executive
privilege now President Nixon's
administration we know is still
remembered mostly for its role in one of
our greatest constitutional crises and
I'm going to focus on a central issue of
that crisis the scope and limits of
executive privilege in our separation of
powers system I'm going to argue that
while executive privilege has clear
legal and historical basis in our
separation of power system President
Nixon's conception of the executive
privilege is too broad and lacks legal
or historical foundation adopting
Nixon's standard I believe would
undermine the delicate balance of power
that exists between our separate
branches of government but we should
also read exist adopting I believe the
standard of critics like Harvard
University professor albergue er who
argue that all claims of executive
privilege are baseless i define
executive privilege as the right of the
president and important executive branch
officials to withhold information from
Congress the courts and the public and
there is little agreement among scholars
today as the first of all whether
executive privilege is a legitimate
power and second if it is legitimate
what the limitations are on claims of
executive privilege how much of the
disagreement can be attributed to the
founding fathers lack of specificity on
the issue of executive privilege for
example the Constitution lacks any
reference to the privilege leading some
critics to call executive privilege a
constitutional myth and others to argue
that executive privilege is such an
obvious executive power that the framers
knew they did not need to make an
explicit grant of that power
well the framers I believe recognized
their inability to identify in advance
all of the possible contingencies under
which presidents may prudently exercise
the privileged power their solution to
the potential abuse of the privilege was
not to delineate explicitly the scope
and limits of the privilege but instead
they relied upon the institutional
checks and balances provided by our
system of separated powers 200 years
experience under our Constitution
provides ample historical evidence and
legal precedent
to establish some general boundaries
defining the scope and limits of
executive privilege
certainly executive privilege can be
invoked first of all when the nation's
security is threatened by divulging
information or secondly when the
confidentiality of internal White House
deliberations directed towards
protecting our national interests is
jeopardized thirdly when the personal
privacy of public officials is
threatened for no public gain and forth
when criminal justice enforcement is
jeopardized now these are admittedly
very broad categories that are open to
interpretation the resolution of
controversies over claims of executive
privilege therefore will have to emerge
I believe from the give-and-take between
our political branches of government I
shall return to the central argument but
let me take up right now Richard Nixon's
conception of executive privilege in
comparison to his predecessors claims of
privilege the scope of President Nixon's
claims were more broadly based President
Nixon went beyond notions of protecting
the nation's security the public
interest and personal privacy to using
claims of executive privilege for
purposes of political expediency
withholding of embarrassing but not
vital information and covering up
executive abuses of power so what is mr.
Nixon's conception of executive
privilege
first of all executive privileged is
used for purposes of political
expediency that was a common folk saying
that goes somewhat like where you stand
on an issue depends upon where you are
sitting and Nixon's view of executive
privilege I think was very much
influenced by his institutional
perspective he strongly opposed
executive privilege as a member of
Congress and made very broadly based
claims of privilege as president in 1948
representative Nixon protested President
Harry Truman's claims of executive
privilege
Nixon exclaimed that the executive
privilege and I quote cannot stand from
a constitutional standpoint and quote
and he protested that executive
privilege gives Congress no right he
said to question the judgment of the
President and that Congress cannot
properly conduct investigations of
executive branch actions if the
president claims
of privilege while representative
Nixon's protestations are very ironic
given President Nixon's actions a
quarter century later as president mr.
Nixon adopted the view that Congress
lacks the legitimacy the question or to
contest executive claims of privilege in
President Nixon's conception of the
separation of powers the president
reigned supreme and may determine the
scope and limits of his own powers
President Nixon claimed that whenever a
dispute occurred between the political
branches over executive branch
information the president's claim of
executive privilege simply resolved the
dispute
President Nixon even questioned the
legitimacy of the courts as referees in
our political system in a revealing
quote President Nixon stated during
Watergate that the manner in which the
president exercises his assigned
executive powers is not subject to
questioning by another branch of
government this leads me to the second
category of Nixon's conception of
executive privilege and that is that
executive privilege has no limits well
if the judiciary lacks authority to
question executive activities then
logically anything the president does is
legitimate mr. Nixon clearly articulated
this belief in his 1977 interview with
David Frost when questioned by frost
about the limits on presidential power
mr. Nixon replied when the President
does it that means it is not illegal
well this statement implies that there
are no limits on presidential authority
including the power to withhold
information all that is required is
presidential approval of an action in a
clear refutation of the more common
constitutional view that no person is
above the law Nixon argue that
presidential actions had higher standing
than the law itself now third under
Nixon's conception of executive
privilege executive privilege belongs to
all executive branch officials for
President Nixon executive griffith
privilege was not a right possessed only
by the president and selected White
House insiders Nixon believed that
executive privilege could be invoked by
the president on behalf of all executive
branch
officials President Nixon claimed that
the president and his aides could not be
questioned about their actions by the
other branches I'll quote him if the
president is not subject to such
questioning it is equally inappropriate
that members of his staff be so
questioned for their roles are in effect
and extension of the president the
President Nixon also claimed an
executive privilege power for the entire
federal bureaucracy Richard Kleindienst
asserted on behalf of mr. Nixon to
Congress lacked the authority to call
any employee of the federal government
to appear before Congress if the
president decided to bar such testimony
President Nixon also defended the right
of executive branch members to claim
executive privilege for themselves let
me turn now to the broader issue that
I'm treating here which is the proper
scope and limits of executive privilege
in our separation of power system I
think one result of the Nixon theory of
executive privilege and of the events
surrounding Watergate is that they have
enhanced the stature and recognition of
those strict opponents of the privilege
and most notably we have the many
writings of Professor ral Berger who
claims that executive privilege is a
constitutional myth and that claims of
executive privilege are at all times
groundless a burghers analysis
identifies four different arguments
supporting the view that executive
privilege lacks any foundation in our
governing system first of all the
Constitution nowhere explicitly grants
an executive power to withhold
information secondly the framers fear
tyranny and thereby avoided creating a
too powerful executive third Congress is
the grand inquest of the nation and must
have access to all executive branch
information to carry out its duties and
fourthly there are well documented
abuses of the privilege by our chief
executives well I think each of these
arguments are defensible in themselves
yet Berger's thesis that executive
privilege is completely groundless I
believe is as problematic as Nixon's
claim that there are no legitimate
limits on executive privilege the
problem presented by the Nixon and
Berger perspectives is that each
attempts to find a completely
unambiguous answer to the nature and
limits of
intial power one perspective sees no
limits on the privilege at all the other
sees no right to withhold information
ever
well executive privilege is neither a
myth nor an absolute unlimited
presidential power executive privilege
in more limited form than the neck
Sounion conception has intellectual
historical and legal roots in our
separation of power system i want to
turn very briefly to my evidence the
intellectual historical and legal roots
of executive privilege and I'll sum this
up rather briefly beginning with the
intellectual roots while executive
privilege is not granted explicitly in
our Constitution the framers did think
of and write about presidential secrecy
the famed Federalist Papers particularly
number 64 and 70 provide rather clear
defenses of executive branch secrecy and
also the two most influential thinkers
of modern constitutionalism Locke and
Montesquieu each wrote that while
executive power usually must be limited
the executives ability to act with force
and discretion in times of emergency
cannot be limited secondly the
historical roots well understanding the
framers views on executive Secrecy also
requires that we look beyond their
writings and to their actions for
example our Constitutional Convention
was conducted in secrecy and the
delegates believed that it was necessary
to protect the convention from external
pressures our chief constitutional
architect James Madison recalled no
Constitution would have been adopted by
the convention if the debates had been
public our early presidents particularly
Washington Adams and Jefferson claimed
executive privilege on a number of
occasions and two lists of many claims
of executive privilege would just take
up too much of our time it is important
to note that our early presidents
exercised the privilege cautiously and
gave clear reasons for claiming the
right to withhold information for
example protecting the national security
protecting the confidentiality of
internal discussions and protecting
treaty negotiations significantly in
house debates over President
Washington's use of executive privilege
then representative James Madison
asserted that an our constitutional
system the executive has a right
a due responsibility to withhold
information under circumstances where
public disclosure could be damaging and
finally the legal basis of executive
privilege there are a number of
important court decisions supporting the
doctrine of executive privilege now the
most important for our purposes is of
course US v Nixon where a unanimous
Court affirmed the legitimacy of
executive privilege as it is employed in
the Constitution the court also made
clear that executive privilege is not an
absolute presidential power
let me turn finally to the question of
the proper scope and limits of executive
privilege I have offered some broad
justifications for executive privilege
including national security and
protecting personal privacy I harbor no
illusions that presidents will not claim
national security reasons for
withholding information where their
reasons may be very different presidents
will claim and we know have claimed
national security reasons for keeping
secrets when their motivations are
partisan or when they wish to cover up
wrongdoing but the answer to this
dilemma is not elimination altogether of
the source of power from which these
abuses derived our founders knew and we
know that any power once granted can be
abused in other words the power to do
good is always the power to do evil the
only solution we have I believe is to
encourage Congress to vigorously use its
powers to challenge and to check claims
of executive privilege if the president
refuses to divulge information to
Congress the Congress can threaten to
withhold support for administration
programs or to withhold appropriations
for administration favorite programs in
this way Congress is sending a clear
message to the president to arrive at
some satisfactory accommodation or face
the prospect of legislative stalemate
the president may find that he can
satisfy congressional curiosity by
divulging sensitive information to only
a few highly respected congressional
leaders who will not abuse their trust
by divulging information for partisan or
policy reasons of such a common
accommodation allows Congress the
opportunity to review the legitimacy of
the president's claim of privilege
without publicly divulging sensitive
materials
so my point is that if we accept the
legitimacy of executive privilege we
have little choice other than to rely
upon the conflicts and compromises build
into our separation of power system to
deal with controversies surrounding
executive branch secrecy mr. Nixon's
conception of an absolute unlimited
executive privilege power lacks any
basis in our separation of power system
thank you
[Applause]
Jerell Warren Hopi Nick Thank You Victor
for those of you who could remember
Victor's introduction of me earlier in
the day you will note that I am perhaps
the Ambala me of the dichotomy of
embodiment of the dichotomy that the
founding fathers had in mind when they
set up this whole business of government
and press I've been both a government
official and a newspaper editor it's
great to be doubly hard to believe I've
noticed there's a certain discipline in
sitting up here I've been out in the
audience for most of the panel's
throughout the week and there is a
discipline up here where you where you
feel that you must listen to the
academic papers being read something
that I hadn't felt before but I
appreciate very much having a chance to
hear the to such middle-of-the-road
papers thank you thank you I cannot
speak to the learn of dissertations on
the fine legal points of secrecy as a
matter of fact I'm the wrong person on
the wrong panel because if anyone thinks
Jerry Warren ooh any secrets of the
Nixon administration he hasn't talked to
Tom Brokaw or any other White House
correspondent of the era if it was
secret it was generally kept secret from
me as well
Ron Ziggler's dictum and I'm sure you'll
talk about this but Ron's dictum was of
what Warren doesn't know won't hurt me
in most cases at work but not all the
Pentagon Papers I'm fascinated by that
subject I was not only nervous but
aghast when the papers were being
published to the New York Times now as
an editor to carry out the dichotomy I'm
delighted that they were published
because it established in law and I do
believe professor that this is one
concrete thing that came out
it established in the in the Supreme
Court case law that prior restraint was
not allowed in our system so in that
regard I'm delighted I'm amused about
the fact that the Nixon administration
are the allegation that the Nixon
administration wanted to create an
official secrets act which was in the
printed paper there was no thought about
that that I know of during the
discussion about the Pentagon Papers
there are already laws and the books to
keep things secret and that I believe is
what the Nixon administration was was
trying to to put in the law I as a
deputy press secretary as I indicated I
heated leaks as an editor I look forward
to them they are obviously titillating
one of the reasons I hated them was that
nobody would admit who leaked watt to
whom and you could get absolutely no
guidance on this week the time that I've
had on his show or one of the others
might have be as an editor and I'm also
been used as I watch a sequence of White
House's
continue to make the same mistakes that
the Nixon White House made and why they
cannot learn from our mistakes I don't
know I'm reminded of a of a White House
Chiefs of Staff Seminar symposium we had
at the University of California of San
Diego in January of 1986 last year and
that was a it was a wonderful seminar
Bob Haldeman was there and he he talked
about that the system of both Nixon
White House and how it worked and how in
the last analysis it failed and the one
most serious crisis of the Nixon
administration he was asked if he had it
to do it over again would he would he
have done it differently and he said his
answer was no this is mr. Haldeman
speaking in terms of the structure we
set up to begin with I think we
established a superb self management
system and structure much of
which still survives today the thing
that I wish we had done was to have kept
the system intact through the greatest
crisis that hit us had we followed our
system we would have resolved the matter
satisfactorily overall and here he
referred to his belief that had they
done that it would have caused some
suffering through some of them some of
the people involved but that would have
been necessary he went on to say the
fault is not that we had a bad system at
all in my opinion it's that we didn't
use the system when we needed it most
and I believe that applies to two white
houses up today I I believe where the
pentagon papers are concerned that I
still believe as an editor even though
they make great stories but the massive
unauthorized release of government
papers is is very troubling it troubled
me then and it troubled me now when I
when I think of the of the guarantees of
our freedoms under the Bill of Rights
I believe that democratic governments
have a very difficult time conducting
their business in some sense of privacy
Constitution may not specifically grant
the executive the the power to keep
secrets although there's certainly some
argument on that and I would argue that
I believe that some secrecy is helpful
in the formulation of public policy and
the most troubling leaks of all are
those leaks as Henry Kissinger talked
about the other evening of position
papers which lead up to the formulation
of policy when I left newspapering for
government I did not renounce my
principles and my sense of ethics what I
returned to journalism as an editor
after leaving the White House I did not
renounce my dedication to orderly
government and my
yearning for that orderly government nor
did I renounce my citizenship which I
believe carries with it the full faith
in our form of government and the
concomitant hope that it will succeed as
probably differentiates me from some
there's one you've talked to but I
really believe that and for that reason
I support executive privilege when it's
used in a balanced way I'm not going to
argue the paper we just heard obviously
the executive privilege power is being
narrowed by the courts and by the
legislature as it's being discussed
I agree somewhat with the four points
that Professor Rozelle iterated but I
think there I think they were a bit too
too sharp in his most cases when I was
in government it was my job to keep
secrets whatever the secrets they
allowed me to have and now as an editor
it's my job to find those secrets out I
can think and I really thought a lot
about this I can think of maybe two
secrets that I knew about in the six and
a half years that I was in the White
House and the first one and the most
interesting one was the time that that
Henry Kissinger came down with a stomach
ache in Pakistan and they noticed came
out from our embassy in Islamabad saying
that Henry Kissinger had a stomach
ailment and was unable to complete his
schedule that day Al Haig we were at San
Clemente and Al Haig called me in rod
was on another mission and I asked him
about this and he said well I can't tell
you any more than you know right there
that you've seen right there but let me
tell you this you're walking on eggs out
there and that was to tell me that I
shouldn't say anything I guess he said
just rely on the on the statement from
Islamabad and you'll be all right
well I did that and it was another
classic case of Stonewall like I suppose
but it worked and there was no suspicion
that the reason Henry Kissinger had
gastritis or whatever it was
if he did was that he had gotten out of
Pakistani airplane air force airplane
and flown to Beijing to set up the
president's visit this was in the summer
of 1971 and he came back and announced
that to the press corps at San Clemente
and it was a complete surprise to the
u.s. press corps to the White House
press corps I remember a week earlier or
less than a week earlier we'd stopped in
Kansas City Missouri on the way to send
San Clemente and the president spoke to
a domestic briefing and he turned his
remarks into a famous Nixon tour day
horizonal of the geopolitical system in
the world what structure in their world
today and from that as hue side he said
in the opening remarks from that you you
and we should have realized that we was
aiming toward China well Jim Deakin who
was a very veteran White House
correspondent left that briefing and
slammed his notebook down he said that's
the worst speech I've ever heard a
president do and he'd been in the White
House a very long time he had missed it
entirely there was definitely a tip-off
in there that that he was going to China
and why he had hoped to do the Brits
listening back in the in the State
Department detected a change in
formulation and when we got to San
Clemente the switchboard lit up with all
the British and the Asian reporters and
the Commonwealth reporters who wanted to
come to San Clemente those who rarely
did so they detected something but our
White House couldn't the other secret I
can remember is during the December I
believe it was December 72 bombing of
Hanoi when the president was at Camp
David Bob Haldeman and John Ehrlichman
Henry Kissinger and Ron Ziegler were on
a special assignment to Palm Springs and
Al Haig was in was in Saigon trying to
talk president too into this I was
called in to the NSC office by Colonel
Kennedy dick Kennedy and he told me that
I was to call a special briefing on
Saturday
and that I would announce the end of the
bombing in Hanoi and the fact that Henry
Kissinger was going back to Paris to
resume the the broken talk talks with
lay ducked oh well I was a tingle of
course and that afternoon we flew up to
San Clemente and talk to the excuse me
to Camp David and talk to the president
about it and we went through some
questions and answers and I felt free
there we are a colonel and a deputy
press secretary running the government
I just a little bit nervous about that
even today but it worked that night I
went to dinner at a friend's birthday
party dinner for Madison I sat next to a
an official from the Soviet embassy I
had I had called a briefing and that
went out on the wire and everybody gets
the wire and the White House staff was
somewhat nervous about it it was unusual
but they said if Warren's gonna do it it
can't be too important so they went home
and they didn't think about it
the only speculation was that that there
would be a succession of hostilities
during 10:00 and that had happened
before that was pretty good speculation
at the dinner that evening in a private
room at though at the Madison this
Soviet counselor turned to me and says I
know what you're going to announce
tomorrow I think he probably does I
thought to myself I was scared to death
I quickly left up dinner and went home
and was nervous about it obviously he
didn't know or thankfully he didn't know
and he did think that that it was going
to be a cessation of hostilities for
Chet well that's a diversion those are
the two secrets I can I could tell you
about the only ones I can remember the
also in his chiefs of staff symposium
Don Rumsfeld quoted a quoted Winston
Churchill and talking about the Normandy
invasion and that I think is appropriate
here Don said putting Winston Churchill
sometimes the truth is so precious it
must be accompanied by a bodyguard of
we could argue that and I think I would
argue that but I am sure that the nation
was well served by having the time to
conduct this diplomacy after these two
decisions were taken the decision to
send Henry to to Beijing and the
decision to send Henry to North to Paris
to talk with lay doctor
it was orderly to have that secret so
that diplomacy could continue so perhaps
that's one of the benevolent secrets
that were held during the Nixon
administration I'm going to close by
getting in my hope that at least two
things have come out of the splendid
conference one I think this conference
has proved that you can have a really of
the Nixon administration that is neither
a white wash nor so blindly actor
ammonius as to render it meaningless
also I believe in hope that the students
who attended this conference the next
generation of scholars will see the
president's men in a more objective life
they will see that these they will see
that these men did not enter a
government with the sole aim of
obstructing justice and committing other
felonies that they are intelligent
thoughtful patriotic persons who have
made mistakes
I also hope but I don't hold I don't
really hope I don't have no optimism
about this I would like to think that
perhaps some of it present generation of
scholars might think the same thing but
I again I'm not very optimistic about
that I would hope the other main benefit
the come out of this conference would be
a sense of civility in the examination
of the Nixon years I would hope that the
Nixon years could be examined as I've
heard some historians talk about it
during this conference in a less than
passionate
I would hope also that that civility
somehow sometime could come into the
White House briefing room and that there
again would be normal civil relations
between the president and the press and
the training of people and and our
governments because I firmly believe
that we will continue to sputter and and
lose our way unless we can find that
respect for orderly government and for
our leaders that they deserve thank you
so much
don't broke off I want to make a couple
of clarifications if the out said one of
the reasons that Victor Navasky is so
pleased to be here this afternoon to
have this as this audience is because
the attendance here today exceeds the
circulation of the nation by a factor of
two and the reason I three years overdue
and my promised piece to the nation is
because the words of our mutual friend
Kelvin but Rowan mr. Navasky pays for a
piece in his magazine a fee somewhere in
the upper two figures so we'll have to
still be negotiating that I have already
learned a great deal here this afternoon
especially from our distinguished
professors but also from Jerry Warren I
with some regularity when we would
travel take Jerry out for dinner and ply
him with martinis all evening long and
always would go home terribly impressed
how he had not given up anything it
wasn't until today that I realized he
didn't know anything that he could give
up and the gentleman at the outset of
this session who raised the eighteen and
a half minutes brought back to my mind
and Iran's I think at least a memorable
day and the White House press room we
had just been I think about four days
before at a tour of the South President
of the United States Richard Nixon had
assembled the southern governors and he
had told them that there would be no
more bombshells and about 36 hours later
Ron called me into his office with a few
of my colleagues and he said I'm not
quite sure I know how to explain this
but there are eighteen and a half
minutes missing from the tape here and
so we learned very early on that when
they said that there were no more
bombshells that means it's a heavy art
that meant that the heavy artillery was
just getting ready to fall at the White
House in those days I'd like to talk
first about secrecy in government
specifically some about the Pentagon
Papers case and about it generally yeah
I do think that it is worth remembering
that 200 years ago when the founding
fathers gathered in Philadelphia
formulate that remarkable document of
the US Constitution they did so in great
secrecy they seal
the windows and pulled the shades must
been terribly uncomfortable in there but
they felt it imperative that if they
were to resolve the differences in this
fledgling nation on that occasion that
they had to do so in secrecy and I have
come to wonder Howard what might have
happened if the current press corps and
its current makeup had been in
Philadelphia that summer think about it
James Madison nearly suffocating in that
Hall taking those notes in that tiny
handwriting finally deciding that he
needs a breath of fresh air and so late
in the afternoon he leaves Constitution
Hall and he goes for a walk through the
streets of Philadelphia he runs smack
into Helen Thomas and Sam Donaldson and
they're badgering him all the way up and
down the street well what's going on in
there mr. Madison catch you don't you
have enough faith in the American people
to tell them what you're doing in their
behalf we hear that you're creating a
monarchy and that you're gonna control
you know most of the money in the
country and I can just see that going on
I'm frankly very grateful that they did
that in secrecy and that Sam and Helen
went around we wouldn't have a first
amendment today I'm absolutely persuaded
[Applause]
[Music]
secrecy in government is like beauty and
bias in the eye to beholder very often
Pentagon Papers and the other cases of
secrecy in the Richard Nixon
administration it seems to me are the
direct result of Richard Nixon's
attitude that nothing the president
could do would be illegal moreover this
compulsion with secrecy in that
administration I am persuaded was in
large part the byproduct of an attitude
on the part of the President and Henry
Kissinger that they knew best the
exercise of power and authority after
all it is worth remembering in seminars
like this and in our review of the
history of those years President Nixon
and Henry Kissinger kept secrets from
the Secretary of State within the
administration classified documents and
privileged information in any
administration this one the carter
administration lyndon johnson john
kennedy before it the coin of the realm
the people who are in power in
washington they spend it selectively
they spend it in congress to win
appropriations they spend it with a
press to win public favor they spend it
in the corridors really to win internal
struggles yes there are occasionally
times when secrecy is required on the
part of the government when there are
documents that truly should be
classified and limited to only a few
select authorized officials for review
we had any number of examples of this
need for secrecy recently in our lives
the day that the libyan bombing attack
took place any number of american news
agencies were aware by deductive
reasoning based on the information that
we had been able to develop that day
that f-111s have left their base in
great britain the chera carrier task
force was steaming south
raining given the four warnings that
we'd received at the highest levels of
the Pentagon and the Middle East that an
attack on Libya was imminent and yet no
one went on the air or published that
beforehand military operation was
underway with American lives at stake it
is an interesting discussion with in
journalistic seminars about whether that
was an appropriate thing to do
desert one occurred during the Jimmy
Carter administration while the American
hostages were being held in Iran Richard
valeriani of NBC News learned in
December that a group of Americans had
escaped the embassy in the initial
confusion confusion and they were being
held at the Canadian Embassy in Tehran
and yet Dick gloriani and NBC News did
not disclose that information we had a
series of exchanges with the Secretary
of Defense and the director of the
Central Intelligence Agency when the
first military payload went up on the
space shuttle system and we delayed
broadcast for 24 hours at NBC News based
on their arguments that was not in the
national interest or in the need of the
right of the people to know what was in
that space shuttle and then it turns out
that at least two technical publications
had described in much greater detail
than what we knew in a publication the
week before what in fact was in the
space shuttle so we have dealt with
secrecy we'll deal with it again it is a
fluid situation in most administration's
and I think that it requires a vigorous
discussion between the press and those
people who are on power and the Congress
of the United States I believe as well
that it's useful to reflect on what mr.
Kincaid said on page three of his paper
released the Pentagon Papers also
diminish the ability of presidents to
conduct foreign policy with secrecy and
dispatch relatively free from the usual
political restraints on presidential
behavior and domestic fields now in this
country we are bound up in the
iran-contra affair a secret operation
went on for almost two years a
wide-ranging fashion in Central America
and in the Middle East without any
congressional oversight with in fact an
attitude that was best characterized it
seems to me by the joint committees on
the iran-contra affair of the Congress
of the United States is saying that it
was characterized by lying by deception
and by secrecy and I believe that the
American public and I believe that this
administration paid a terrible price for
that secrecy and deception moreover it
is worth looking at page 18 when you're
reflecting on the Pentagon Papers as
Jerry was talking about he was troubled
by the release of massive amounts of
classified information I'm just as
troubled by the classification of
massive amounts of government papers it
is worth remembering as Kincaid is
written it subsequently officials of the
Nixon administration including dr.
Kissinger acknowledged that publication
of the Pentagon Papers did no noticeable
harm to the United States gave no
noticeable aid to the enemy's North
Vietnamese with whom the United States
was not officially at war furthermore
from the very beginning of the White
House debate over how to handle the
publication of the Pentagon Papers there
was serious consideration given to D
classifying them on the spot there are
volumes there are car loads of papers
throughout Washington even as we sit
here today classified that need not be
there done because they protect the
position of the people where they're
making decisions that may or may not be
in your best interest it seems to me we
talked briefly about executive privilege
my experiences with it as a journalist
covering the Nixon White House I have a
trivet trivia question for you here this
afternoon many of you no doubt will
remember that celebrated Houston news
conference it was the last public news
conference that Richard Nixon gave while
he was in office and Dan Rather and the
President had a memorable exchange
are you running for something mister
rather the president asked no sir are
you who asked the succeeding questions
well I did it's lost in the backwash of
history I'll tell you something
interesting about that I had been
intrigued by the question of executive
privilege as claimed by the president at
that time and how it may apply to a
chief executive who was the subject of
impeachment proceedings so I had worked
very hard in the days leading up to
Houston talk to the leading
constitutional authorities on that very
point and I asked them if they could
help me with research and this included
both conservative and liberal and
moderate constitutional scholars if they
could help me with the specific
presidents mr. Nixon was citing as he
claimed executive privilege
among them Madison and Jackson the
research came back that all them claimed
executive privilege but uniformly with
the caveat except in criminal
proceedings or impeachment so that night
after that exchange with Dan Rather as I
was the last questioner on the panel I
asked mr. Nixon if he had been
historically inaccurate or misleading he
acknowledged the soundness of my
research but he stuck by his original
position really always amused me in a
way about the Nixon doctrine of
executive privilege was its selectivity
dealing with the judiciary committee who
was absolute except in the White House
felt it would gain advantage by making a
conspicuous display of cooperation by
shipping a trunkload of expurgated
transcripts to the hill in what I
remember what were they green binders
Jerry I remember you being outside the
West Wing of the White House and
summoning the reporters that day so that
they could be loaded into the trunk of
the car there were about 40 of them it
made it look like it was a large
shipment of transcripts going to the
Capitol Hill when in fact we were about
four pages in each binder it filled up
the entire trunk of the car each binder
was to a specific point and believe me
it was a very specific point but
were attempting obviously as is their
right to make the best impression they
could on the evening news that night
moreover some of you may also recall
that they decided that John Stennis
might be the lone legislative exception
to the right of executive privilege by
giving him permission then to listen to
some of the tapes and offer his
interpretation and his judgment Esther
that whether they were right or wrong
executive privilege it seems to me does
have its application I do believe that
there are times when the President of
the United States ought to be able to
protect matters of national security
especially involving military operations
I think that there ought to be exchanges
that he can have with his advisors that
should be privileged that there are
individuals who work in any given
administration whose privacy privacy
should be protected as well but as we
learn in the iran-contra affair the
definition of national security the need
for secrecy is not an airtight
proposition that was by any reasonable
interpretation of hairless undertaking
in which it seems to me the risks far
outweigh the rewards by every
conceivable standard of measurement I
believe that the reporting procedures
must be tightened I think that the
current recommendations of the joint
committees on iran-contra make some
salient points when they say that there
ought to be a single committee on the
hill made up of a smaller group of
people because the fact of the matter is
there is a good deal of leakage there
but in fairness to those people who
serve in Congress there is a great deal
more leakage in almost every agency of
the executive branch of government and
that includes the White House stem with
more sophistication it's done generally
with more reliability and accuracy but
that's where the leaks occur by and
large because they are the people who
are in control of the information and
they do it selectively I believe as well
however that when it comes to executive
privilege that there should be some kind
of a statutory definition of a
how and when it applies ought to be
determined by law and most important
perhaps there must be a mechanism for a
speedy resolution of a conflict over the
use of executive privilege let me just
leave you with this thought I believe
that during the days of Watergate and
I'm sure that there will be protests on
the part of my colleagues in the panel -
Sigler mr. Warren who are old pals from
California incidentally I believe that
especially in the closing days of
Watergate
the White House press corps heard on the
side of caution we knew what was at
stake
we were talking not just about the
historic fate of one man but we were
talking about the great office the
engine that drives the federal system of
government in this country the
presidency the Republic was at stake in
its own way and so in fact when
information came to us it was very
carefully sifted and checked again and
again and again tested not just for its
accuracy but for his relevancy as well
it was too easy in those closing days of
the Nixon years to be able to pick up
information from people who are
attempting in a cheap way to make their
own mark in that great scandal so I
think that the press ultimately by and
large acted responsibly and it's worth
remembering that the American press is
not in business to foster anarchy it is
worth remembering that we are there we
believe on a daily basis acting on
behalf of the people of what is being
done in their name they have a right to
know about 200 years the system of
government has been the envy of the
world really and the foundation of our
system of government has been a free and
vigorous exchange of information we are
strengthened by that free and vigorous
exchange of information not weakened by
it we are strengthened by knowing who is
acting in our name and in what
and finally let me leave you with
something that I stole from David
Brinkley some years ago I don't do our
great Brinkley but I think that it's
important to have some of the cadence at
least of David Brinkley knows
he says it's it's worth remembering that
there are many countries in the world
where the politicians have seized the
power they've seized the power and
muscle the press but but so far there
are no countries in the world where the
press has seized the power and most of
the politicians thank you all very much
[Applause]
[Music]
Ron Ziegler that was well done tom
I find myself speaking third I thought s
came before Z mr. Simon but I figure
that with the time saving some time for
questions that I have only a short
period to speak so don't be concerned I
haven't talked longer than eighteen and
a half minutes since 1974 you have to
think about that for a moment the I
think it's been pointed out that the
issue of secrecy in government has been
an issue that has confronted this
country from the outset of our republic
particularly since world war ii and did
not necessarily begin with the Pentagon
Papers nor has it ended with the
Pentagon Papers let me talk briefly
about the Pentagon Papers Gerry touched
on that it was a day after Tricia Nixon
was married to edy Cox in June of 1971
when the New York Times ran on the front
page the fact that it was going to
publish from the archives some extensive
volumes of the three decades of
progressive involved in the United
States and Vietnam at that time we in
the government we in the White House had
absolutely no idea what was contained in
this material in fact we did not know
that the vast majority of this material
was classified secret and top secret the
panelists I believe John Ken Cade
pointed out and also Gerry warned were
correct we did not at first feel that
action was required as a matter of fact
that President Nixon as he points out in
his memoirs felt that politically we
should move ahead without any action on
the Pentagon Papers because it in fact
traced involvement to be in in Vietnam
on the on the part of the Kennedy and
Johnson administration and this could
have been to the political advantage of
the Nixon administration however as
president
and points out from the standpoint of
policy the issue focused on protecting
national security interest now it
sometimes is overlooked that we did not
know what was in the Pentagon Papers and
we had people within the government
Henry Kissinger being one of them who
cautioned President Nixon in the most
extreme terms most severe terms that the
publication of the Pentagon Papers the
publication of these secret documents
could in fact break codes reveal
clandestine sources and have a severe
and negative impact on national security
of the United States so President
Nixon's decision to move to prior
restraint until the government had an
opportunity to evaluate the impact of
these papers was the purpose the purpose
was not to restrain the press the
objective was not anti press the dilemma
that President Nixon faced is what we're
talking about secrecy in government
where do you draw the line between the
protection of national interests and
national security and the public's right
to know in our democracy it was felt
that for national security purposes we
had to move ahead I believe that that as
distinguished as papers have been
presented that the point is stretched in
both mr. Rosell mr. Kincaid's paper as
to the purpose of our action purpose of
the president's action prior restraint
was seriously considered and the impact
that the prior restraint was sirak
seriously considered before the decision
was made like to to cover one additional
point in making an additional comment
regarding John Kincaid's paper mr.
Ellsworth of mr. Russo were indicted the
question was even after the papers were
published what does one do what does the
government do when documents are stolen
and released illegally to the public
it's not a new issue and it's not an
issue that ended with the Pentagon
Papers Teddy white pointed out in his
view that clearly mr. Ellsberg stole
papers illegally enacted against the
National Defense laws of the United
States I agree with Teddy white mr.
Kincaid does not I was surprised that it
was not pointed out in the papers the
fact that we as a country currently have
a very important court case pending
before the Fourth Circuit Court relating
to the 1917 Espionage Act in that case
is the case of John excuse me Sam
Morrison Sam Morrison was a as most of
you many of you may know Sam Morrison
was an employee of the Pentagon top
secret clearance Sam Morrison was also a
stringer reporter for jane's naval
review in 1984 in 1985 Sam Morrison
picked off of the desk of a colleague
top secret photographs taken by our
satellites of Soviet submarine
the construction and he sent that to
Jane's naval review in 1985 the federal
government sought an indictment it
received an indictment prosecuted Sam
Morrison under the 1917 Espionage Act
and mr. Morrison was convicted by jury
trial in this case the government did
not move to prove the intent the intent
that mr. Morrison had to do harm to the
United States government it's simply
prosecuted and one's case without the
proof of intent and I would think that
this would be a substantial concern it
is somewhat of a concern to me in terms
of focusing on the issue is there in
fact a difference between an individual
like John Walker stealing material and
supplying it to a federal another
government for 18 years with a clear
intent to do harm to the United States
versus an individual working in
government who for a political or other
motive Morrison's motive is unclear
takes secret document and leaks it to
jain review which the association press
picked up and ultimately it was
published in the New York Times and The
Washington Post so the issue does not
stop with the Pentagon Papers the Fourth
Circuit decision is going to be and is
going to come down I believe after the
first of your significant decision
relevant to the question of prosecuting
those who are in government and steal
classified materials
executive privilege in the use of
executive privilege we have gone through
periods in this country of extensive use
of executive privilege historically
those who are studying history will
recall John moss John moss subcommittee
John moss a congressman from California
who in the early 1950s when it was felt
that there was extensive government
secrecy or non national security items
chaired the Subcommittee on government
information policy in the House of
Representatives at that time the
bureaucrats in the Truman and Eisenhower
administration were using executive
privilege extensively for the purpose of
not providing information to the press
and to the American people 18
departments referred to executive
privilege for refusal to submit
materials and documents asked for by the
press and by the Congress the John moss
committee ultimately led to the 1967
passage of the Freedom of Information
Act I believe that we have progressively
to the conflict of our democracy tried
in numerous ways to deal with this very
complex issue of executive privilege and
secrecy and government clearly secrecy
and government should be limited
President Nixon as a matter of fact felt
that there was too much classification
of government papers and attempted to
move with the study to limit the
declassification
I believe that there should not be
judicial or legislative legislative
activity dealing with executive
privilege I think we have enough already
I believe in the u.s. versus Nixon case
that was referred to earlier we brought
executive privilege to the
constitutional level under Article two I
do not favor any additional judicial or
legislative activity regarding executive
privilege in my opinion the issue of
executive privilege is grounded on
attitude and credibility of the
executive branch and I believe that the
greater the credibility the better the
attitude on the part of government and
federal officials in dealing with the
release of public information the easier
our republic will be able to deal with
the issue of executive privilege I agree
with with the point of view that those
who are elected or appointed to
positions of executive authority
Authority must recognize that government
in a democracy could not be wiser than
the people
I believe that the attitude held by
government is extremely important in
establishing credibility the American
people in my opinion must feel that they
are receiving from their government in a
credible fashion what they feel they
should be receiving and I believe that
the establishment of credibility on the
part of the government is relatively
simple relatively easy easy
I believe that there are six basic
fundamental steps that a government can
follow to establish credibility and
therefore allow for greater ease and
acceptance of executive privilege
statements when they are applied for
national security and legitimate
purposes first of all government should
not cloak embarrassing situations and
conceal shortcomings by exerting
executive privilege it is rapidly found
out and it is rapidly
understood by the public I think that
the spokesman and the president United
States should only in all ways the
standpoint of establishing credibility
speak from a basis of fact should never
shoot from the hip and they should never
assume the answers I also feel that the
President and spokesman for the
president should never knowingly mislead
or lie I think history has already shown
that a democracy will not tolerate
deception will not accept deception and
I think we have seen that particularly
in the contemporary time since World War
two I also believe that
president and spokesman should never
overreact to criticism they should never
look at the press as the enemy because
if they do they tend to react in the
negative and defensive fashion I also
feel finally that a president and the
administration must have a realistic
view of how they are going to be
perceived by the public and by the press
what is good for one individual is not
good for the other but a firm and clear
wrecking necking recognition of that
perception I think is extremely
important so I think in terms of
executive privilege secrecy in
government
it goes beyond legalities even though
they're important it it goes beyond
establishing and our democracy a set of
rules I believe it goes to attitude I
believe it goes to communications and I
believe it goes fundamentally to the
credibility of the presidency of the
United States a president has a
responsibility to establish and maintain
the credibility of his office now just
to conclude I have heard and we read
about the many faces and many
personalities of the President Nixon I
was one of the president's staff men who
spent time with him wind power past
flying over Missouri on the way to San
Clemente and to self-imposed exile and I
was with President Nixon for almost a
year in San Clemente Richard Nixon is an
extremely complex individual
but I really in the time that I dealt
with them and worked with him over a
period of seven years I personally saw
only one face of Richard Nixon a very
intent complicated complex individual
who was constantly strategizing
constantly working at his position as
president and president-elect constantly
re-evaluating and reassessing himself
and his positions one thing I saw in San
Clemente California during the the
period shortly after the resignation and
during the year that that he was there
and I was there with him he was there
long
President Nixon fully and totally
recognized and recognizes the
shortcomings of his administration and
he struggled in that evaluation and he
agonized about the dilemma he placed his
men in and the sacrifices that they had
to make I saw him go through that
struggle but I also saw a man with
courage accept his shortcomings accept
his failures accept the disgrace that he
received in resigning and did not
destroy himself and I believe in his
memoirs and those who are studying the
Nixon presidency I would suggest that
you read Richard Nixon's memoirs in his
memoirs he said and he points out that
the period of his presidency the Vietnam
War Watergate was a period of great
division in the country a period of
great controversy there were excesses on
the part of many parties there were
excessive those who opposed the war
there were excesses within the Nixon
administration and I believe he believes
as he wrote in his memoir that the
actions and the reactions and the
excesses of all parties
we'll be judged by history and as he
points out he is prepared to live with
that judgment and I believe he feels
that way today thank you for having me
and I look forward to your questions
Howard Simon Eric thank you and they
clean up discussing so I'm gonna do just
that and clean up I don't know if Judge
Wiggins is here but I want him to know
that Helpmann is innocent
I am the Lindbergh baby for those of you
who were at the earlier meeting I'm the
managing editor who was the managing
editor and Ben Bradley was not he was
the executive editor I met President
Kennedy once in my life and I've never
met President Nixon for Victor Navasky
everywhere I speak particularly the
groups of journalists I get asks for
groups interested in journalism I get
asked three questions who is deep throat
what ever happened to Janet cook she's
the young lady who made up a story I
don't know if Judge Wiggins is in the
audience nope every time I speak to
groups interested in journalism or to
journalists I get asked three questions
only the first is who is deep throat the
second is what ever happened to Janet
Cooke who is the young lady who made up
a story about Jimmy the heroin addict
and we gave back the Pulitzer Prize we
didn't deserve for a made-up story
and the third pressing question in
American journalism is when are you
going to invent an ink that doesn't come
off in your hands
to Tom Brokaw Madison would have been
the leaker
to my context colleague and friend Jerry
Warren I think that respect for the
White House will return when the White
House shows some respect for people and
law as dumb as my friend and colleague
Hank Johnson put it well recently of one
administration had the arrogance of
power and the president ministration had
the arrogance of popularity too Ron
Ziegler on his six steps I think we need
only one and that is to tell the truth
finally I'd like to judge Wiggins also
said something that bothered me about
where were you meaning the pressin going
back and he also said this about the
congress looking at other presidents and
what they did and that reminds me of a
story there was a wonderful journalist
he's now get a wonderful journalist in
Washington DC by name of Peter lizard or
from Chicago and when Ron Nessen took
over from Ron Ziegler there was a press
conference that Ron Nessen held and he
made this wonderful speech saying that
he wasn't gonna do what run Ziegler did
things have changed White House would be
different and Liz aguar raised his hand
and he said mr. reservoir what do you
have to say and Peter stood up and said
mr. Nelson two runs don't make a right
and mr. Kincaid's paper in mr. Kincaid's
paper he says that about the Pentagon
Papers which I also was involved in that
at the post that first President Nixon
was not especially disturbed by the
publication of the papers their contents
after all dealt with policymaking prior
to his own administration and were
therefore likely to be embarrassing to
the Democrats just before an election
year
however the president's National
Security Advisor Henry Kissinger
prevailed upon the President to do
something about this quote massive
hemorrhage of state secrets close quote
and it's it's the most delicious thought
of all and one that I've harbored from
time to time which is that a tenth
temper tantrum by Henry Kissinger
resulted in Watergate that it indeed
started a chain of events that led to
the resignation of mr. Nixon the
Pentagon Papers were fascinating no one
read them at the time the site issue
became the issue and that was the papers
the newspapers the New York Times The
Washington Post the fight between the
administration and to this day I really
don't know how many people have ever
read the Pentagon Papers and there
weren't many secrets of the volumes that
had something that might compromise
national security were left out by the
newspapers and I'd like to talk a bit
about secrecy because my experience in
Washington in the 30 years in Secrets
was that you can't work there we'll even
live there without bumping into a secret
the over-classification system is so
vast that everything is classified and
classified for many reasons a very few
secrets are classified because they are
true secrets many more are classified to
save embarrassment gain cost overrun
hide of cost overrun ratted to protect
somebody's turf to do lots of things and
indeed another reason for classification
is habit it's easier just to stamp
something secret then argue whether it
should or it shouldn't but my experience
in Washington has been was that most
real honest-to-god secrets walk out the
front door they don't show up in The
Washington Post or the New York Times
used to be in the good old days that the
secrets were taken by people who had an
ideology they were either pro-russian or
pro-nazi or pro something else that
those days are gone now it's just pure
greed they sell the secrets and most of
the important secrets that have been
given away my experience in the last 10
years have all been
for money and have been the most
important secrets like the kh-11
satellite spy satellite or what the
walkers did to our submarine fleet I
think we want to get to Watergate for
just a moment because I think there are
three water gates fascinating to me I
think there are many many unanswered
questions and I would hope that young
journalists would go back and revisit it
there are three that still puzzle me and
I understand that mr. Magruder may have
answered one here yesterday I wasn't
here but the three questions are who is
deep throat
and unless it seems to me unless Bob
Woodward comes forward or deep throat
comes forward we may never know to what
was really on the eighteen and a half
minutes and unless somebody in this
audience who knows or mr. Nixon who
knows comes forward and tells us we may
never know and what were they doing in
the Watergate now there's lots of
speculation I understand mr. Magruder
suggested it had to do with Kenny
O'Donnell and Howard Hughes and that's
what the bug was planted for and that's
been avenue for speculation for a long
time in my view but nobody has really
come forward and said this is it
so I think there are three primary
questions and as I say I would love to
have Watergate revisited finally I have
a crude measuring-rod about free press
and it's it's that the freer the press
the freer the society and I go around
the world with my little string for a
measuring string and do this in
countries and find that arguably we have
the freest press in the world and I
think that is an essential part of
democracy and something we oughta
treasure and and you know we may not be
civil all the time Jerry and that's okay
with me in the latter days of Watergate
I had a pang of conscience that said to
me I know what the administration's up
to they've got a unique way to celebrate
the Bicentennial
they're gonna do away with the Bill of
Rights and I think the press good or bad
no paper is that good for all the time
or that bad all the time is one
ingredient that's an essential part of
democracy and you ought to be all be
grateful for the First Amendment thank
you
[Applause]
thank you we're running late so what I'm
going to do is those who want to ask
questions line up at the microphones I'm
going to give our panelists the the
paper writers a chance very briefly to
respond to the remarks that were made if
they would like to from their seats
maybe mr. Kincaid do you want to start
just one couple of comments in response
to mr. Warren's comments the Supreme
Court did not hold that prior restraint
is out-of-bounds in the American system
that held only in that particular
situation and the number of the justices
said they would entertain prior
restraint in terms of secrecy laws and
so on the question is what laws apply in
this situation and why did the Justice
Department have such difficulty with
this prosecution I think a major point
here that is this mystique about top
secret and the last Speaker I think
touched on that that this is a rubber
stamp that people put on documents and
the executive order provides rules for
classifying documents and during the
trial of Ellsberg and Russo when the
Defense Department officials were asked
what kind of training they had received
as to what they should classify or not
classify most of them said they received
no training they simply had the rubber
stamps on their desk and they used them
because everybody else did and one
person said well they showed me a film
and this movie told me to beware of
good-looking women with blond hair and
that was the extent of my training so
that you have a situation where you have
a potential prosecution of an individual
or a newspaper for releasing information
which has the stamp top-secret on it
with the Nixon administration arguing
that you cannot maintain that it was
improperly classified and and this was
the point I was raising about Criminal
Code revision that what the
administration could not get through the
trial it was trying to get through
Criminal Code revision and that would
have if the Congress rejected it would
have held that the impropriety of the
top-secret stamp would not have been
a defense I have mr. Ziegler's point
about the Morris case as well take and I
did not discuss it because this was
about Nixon but I do agree with them
it's a very disconcerning - case made
all the more disconcerning by the
repugnancy of him selling the
information to the to the magazine but
it does raise exactly the same kind of
issue that was raised in the Pentagon
Papers trial
thank you okay just very quickly so we
can get to your questions I thought mr.
Ziegler's steps towards establishing
credibility was very useful and I'd like
to take some time to look at those
categories and reassess some of what
I've had to say about it I think it is
much more complex than the issue of just
tell the truth because sometimes there
are certain things that constitute the
truth that simply cannot be exposed for
certain reasons and I think mr.
Ziegler's assessment is much more
sophisticated along those lines I would
disagree with mr. Brokaw's assessment
that we need a statutory definition I
think we do need some general
definitions in terms of what is
acceptable in asserting executive
privilege but it cannot be very specific
it can only be very general and that
goes back to the categories that I
raised previously and again it has to be
left up I think to the branches of
government to resolve these situations
on a case-by-case basis okay I would
like to open the questions and I'm going
to take the prerogative of the moderator
to ask the first question to any one of
the panelists who would care to answer
it
that is Morten Halpern whose phone was
tapped as the result of a service in the
Nixon administration has argued recently
that covert action is incompatible with
democracy and that all of the things
that we're talking about today in effect
are made are implicit in the idea that
covert action is compatible with
democracy secrecy lies and illegal
action inevitably flow from covert
action in this view do any of you have
anything to say about that I think that
you can't have a blanket denial of
covert action as a tool to protect
democracy witness what happened in world
war two there are a number of covert
actions then
protected I think not only our system
but free people throughout the globe so
I think that you cannot say uniformly
that covert action ought not to be
engaged in by a system available I
should say he he makes the argument for
a peacetime and says that in wartime
you're not you used to spend the rules
of democracy but we don't want to do
that as a routine course of national
life the other comment said no no I will
turn the floor of it to the first
questioner if you would identify
yourself first please my name is Steven
Gilroy I have a question for mr. Siegel
and mr. Brokaw I was wondering mr.
Ziegler in particular if you could
recount for us the details of a strange
event in 1973 I think in New Orleans
when President Nixon was angry with the
press and I think he physically ordered
you to take care of the press I was
wondering how did you react to that
personally and mr. Brokaw what did the
members of the press think about that
strange behavior of a president against
the press we had on that day received
what was considered to be quite a
serious assassination threat and
President Nixon was under some strain he
was on his way as I recall back from San
Clemente and he was going in Key
Biscayne I mean that he was going into
wflw Hall to give a speech that he
really didn't want to give and I was
walking behind him and I believe he
turned around and saw Helen Thomas and
Dan Rather I believe in a couple other
members of the press kind of closing in
on him and we were walking up a
embankment so he turned around and he
said go take care of them which appeared
on television to be a shove and and that
was what was recorded I think one thing
that should be noted that as soon as we
got back on Air Force One I was sitting
in the staff section and the first thing
he did was to walk back into the staff
section of Air Force One put his hand on
my shoulder in front of the staff and
say I'm sorry for that back there that's
what happened and it was of course
widely
I wasn't there that day so I can't I
mean it was widely reported as you know
and the way that it was I was witness to
a much smaller incident with another
member of the staff we went out to Xenia
Ohio which there had been a bad tornado
the president went out and a act of
compassion to to tour the tour the
remains of the this devastated town and
also because he was in some difficulty
because of Watergate and we had some
dark suspicions that he might have been
there because it made it look like a
more compassionate human being at that
time although that was not reported that
night as a motivation because we simply
didn't know that but he was in a it
really was a shocking experience to walk
through this town and see one home after
another level than people still
wandering around in a kind of state of
shock and he was a small town and we
were down on the Main Street just a few
of us and he was talking to some of the
townspeople who were huddled around him
looking for some relief emotionally and
financially at that point from the
government and he was saying this is the
worst thing I've seen since I went to
the Alaska earthquake it was just that
this is much worse because of the
personal devastation it was very quiet
and there was a woman who came down the
street who said who is that and one of
the Secret Service agents said that's
president United States she said that
Nixon now he's trying to carry on this
conversation with these people and you
could hear this voice ringing out down
Main Street and they suggested
Nixon and beat him get him out of here
we don't want him around here well you
could see the color go up in the
president's face understandably and we
turned to walk into the town hall there
and Steve bull said right this way mr.
president said I know which way it is
and gave him a shove about 15 feet into
the hall and went on in that was an
incident that got only minor attention
that night but it was an understandable
almost human reaction to something that
had happened to him that day
thank you those are the only two shoving
incidents that I'm aware
sir my name is David Sarnoff no
significant relation to the founder of
the NBC and RCA this question is
primarily directed to mr. Brokaw
recently political scientist Michael
parenthese spoke here at Hofstra and he
said that most media sources in the
country are conservative and there are
very few liberal sources of media
summing up what he said he said that
editors and owners refused or reluctant
to present positions of those whose
views go against that of advertisers of
the media and the media's opinions
themselves thus the public does not get
a full spectrum of the news and I just
wanted to hear from the media side that
Professor will do very well on this
circuit because he has a singular point
of view it seems to me most most of the
complaints that we receive and I think
Howard will back this up or just